Explain transformer architecture: attention, multi-head attention, positional encoding.
Transformer: processes all tokens in parallel via attention, no recurrence. Flow: tokens → embeddings + positional encoding → stacked attention blocks → output.
Attention: each token emits Q, K, V vectors. Score = softmax(QKᵀ/√dₖ), output = weighted sum of V. √dₖ scaling keeps gradients stable. Each token becomes a context-aware blend of the sequence.
Multi-head: run attention h times in parallel, each on a lower-dim subspace with its own Q/K/V. Heads capture different relationships (syntax, long-range, coreference); concat + linear projection. Same total compute.
Positional encoding: attention is order-blind, so inject position. Sinusoidal originally; RoPE in modern LLMs (rotates Q/K by position, better for relative distance and long context).
Block: self-attention → add & norm → feed-forward → add & norm, with residuals. Decoder adds causal masking; most current LLMs are decoder-only.
Simple answer: A transformer is a model that reads all the words of a sentence at once instead of one by one. Attention lets each word look at every other word and decide which ones matter most for its meaning. Multi-head attention just does this several times in parallel, so the model can notice different kinds of relationships at the same time (grammar, far-apart references, who "he" refers to, etc.). Because the model sees everything at once, it has no built-in sense of word order, so positional encoding adds a small signal telling it where each word sits in the sentence. These pieces are stacked in many layers, and that stack is what powers today's LLMs.

Difference between encoder-only, decoder-only, encoder-decoder models.
Encoder-only (BERT, RoBERTa): bidirectional attention—every token sees all others. Great for understanding tasks: classification, NER, embeddings, retrieval. Trained with masked language modeling. Can't generate text autoregressively.
Decoder-only (GPT, Llama, Claude): causal masking—token sees only past. Trained on next-token prediction. Generation-native; now dominant for general-purpose LLMs because they scale well and handle understanding tasks via prompting. In-context learning lives here.
Encoder-decoder (T5, BART, original Transformer): encoder reads input bidirectionally, decoder generates while cross-attending to encoder output. Best for seq-to-seq with distinct input/output: translation, summarization. Cleaner separation of "comprehend" vs "produce."
Pick: understanding/embeddings → encoder-only; open-ended generation + general LLM → decoder-only; structured transform of one sequence into another → encoder-decoder.
Simple answer: Encoder-only models read the whole text in both directions at once, so they are great at understanding text (labeling, search, classification) but cannot write new text. Decoder-only models read left to right and keep predicting the next word, so they are natural writers — this is what ChatGPT-style models are, and it's now the standard choice for general LLMs. Encoder-decoder models use one part to read the input and another part to write the output, which fits tasks like translation and summarization. Rule of thumb: understanding → encoder-only, free-form writing and chat → decoder-only, turning one text into another text → encoder-decoder.

How does temperature, top-k, top-p sampling affect output?
Temperature scales logits before softmax: <1 sharpens (deterministic, safe), >1 flattens (random, creative), 0 = greedy. Top-k samples only from the k highest-probability tokens. Top-p (nucleus) samples from the smallest token set whose cumulative probability ≥ p, adapting to the distribution's shape. Use low temp + low p for factual/JSON; raise both for creative. Top-p generally preferred over top-k since it adapts per step.
Simple answer: These three settings control how random the model's word choices are. Temperature is a creativity dial: low keeps answers safe and predictable, high makes them more varied and surprising, and 0 always picks the most likely word. Top-k means "only choose among the k most likely next words." Top-p means "only choose among the smallest group of words that together cover p of the probability," which adjusts itself automatically each step. Use low settings for facts, code, and JSON; turn them up for creative writing.

What is the context window and how do you handle inputs exceeding it?
Max tokens (input + output) the model attends to in one pass; fixed by training. Exceeding it truncates or errors. Handle via: chunking + RAG to retrieve only relevant pieces, summarization/compression of history, sliding window, map-reduce over chunks, or a larger-context model. For agents/chat: trim or summarize old turns, keep system prompt + recent context.
Simple answer: The context window is the model's short-term memory — the maximum amount of text it can look at in one go, counting both your input and its reply. If your text is bigger than that, it gets cut off or rejected. To handle it: split the text into pieces and fetch only the relevant ones (RAG), summarize older parts to shrink them, slide a window across the text, process pieces separately and merge the results, or simply switch to a model with a bigger memory. In chatbots, keep the instructions and recent messages, and trim or summarize the old ones.

Explain tokenization (BPE, WordPiece) and its impact on cost/performance.
Tokenization splits text into subword units. BPE (GPT) merges frequent byte pairs iteratively; WordPiece (BERT) merges by likelihood gain. Subwords balance vocab size vs sequence length—rare words split into pieces, common words stay whole. Impact: billing and context are per-token, so token-dense text (code, non-English, rare words) costs more and fills context faster. Bad tokenization inflates length and hurts latency/cost.
Simple answer: Models don't read letters or whole words — they read tokens, which are chunks of text. Common words stay as one token, while rare or unusual words get broken into several pieces. BPE and WordPiece are just two slightly different recipes for deciding how to make those chunks. Why it matters: you are billed per token and the model's memory limit is counted in tokens, so text that splits into many pieces (code, non-English languages, rare words) costs more money, fills the memory faster, and takes longer to process.

Walk through a RAG pipeline end to end.
Ingestion: load docs → chunk → embed → store in vector DB (+ metadata). Query time: embed query → retrieve top-k (vector/hybrid) → optionally re-rank → assemble context + query into prompt → LLM generates grounded answer → optionally cite sources. Production adds caching, guardrails, eval, and tracing.
Simple answer: First, prepare your documents: split them into pieces, turn each piece into a list of numbers that captures its meaning (an embedding), and save those in a special database. Then, when a user asks a question, turn the question into numbers the same way, find the stored pieces that are most similar, and paste those pieces together with the question into the prompt. The model then answers using that material instead of only its memory, which keeps answers accurate and lets you point to sources. Real systems also add caching, safety checks, and quality monitoring.

Chunking strategies and trade-offs (fixed, semantic, recursive).
Fixed-size (token/char + overlap): simple, fast, but cuts mid-thought. Recursive: split on hierarchy (paragraph → sentence → word) until size fits—preserves structure, good default. Semantic: split where embedding similarity drops—coherent chunks but compute-heavy. Trade-off: smaller chunks = precise retrieval but lose context; larger = more context but noisy. Overlap mitigates boundary loss.
Simple answer: Chunking is how you cut documents into pieces before storing them for search. Fixed-size cutting is the easiest but can slice a sentence right down the middle. Recursive cutting tries paragraph breaks first, then sentences, then words, so the pieces stay natural — a good default choice. Semantic cutting splits wherever the topic changes, giving the cleanest pieces but needing the most computation. The core trade-off: small pieces are easy to match precisely but lose surrounding context, big pieces keep context but drag in noise. Letting pieces overlap a little softens the problem at the cut points.

Dense vs sparse retrieval; when to use hybrid search.
Sparse (BM25/keyword): exact term match, great for rare terms, IDs, jargon; no semantic understanding. Dense (embeddings): semantic similarity, handles paraphrase/synonyms; weak on exact tokens. Hybrid combines both (e.g., reciprocal rank fusion) to get exact-match precision + semantic recall—default for production where queries mix keywords and meaning.
Simple answer: Sparse search is classic keyword matching — it shines when users type exact terms, product codes, or jargon, but it doesn't understand meaning at all. Dense search compares meanings using embeddings, so it finds the right documents even when completely different words are used, but it can miss exact terms and IDs. Hybrid search simply runs both and merges the two result lists, so you get exact-match precision plus understanding of meaning — which is why it's the usual default in real products where queries mix both styles.

How do you evaluate retrieval quality (recall@k, MRR, NDCG)?
Recall@k: fraction of relevant docs in top-k—did we fetch the right context. Precision@k: fraction of top-k that's relevant. MRR: 1/rank of first relevant result—good when one right answer. NDCG: rank-weighted relevance with graded labels—best when ranking order matters. Need a labeled query→relevant-doc set; can bootstrap labels with LLM-as-judge.
Simple answer: These metrics check whether your search step actually returned the right documents. Recall@k asks: of all the truly relevant documents, how many made it into the top k results? MRR asks: how far down the list was the first correct result — the higher it appears, the better the score. NDCG asks: are the most relevant documents ranked at the top, not just present somewhere in the list? To measure any of them you need a test set of questions with known correct documents, which you can build by hand or bootstrap with an LLM grader.

How do you reduce hallucination in RAG systems?
Improve retrieval (hybrid + re-ranking, better chunking) so context is actually relevant. Prompt to answer only from context and say "I don't know" otherwise. Add citations/grounding checks. Post-hoc verify answer against retrieved docs (faithfulness eval). Lower temperature. Filter low-similarity retrievals. Constrain scope; flag when no good context found.
Simple answer: Hallucination means the model confidently makes things up. To reduce it: make the search step better so the model actually receives the right material, tell it plainly to answer only from that material and to say "I don't know" when it can't, and make it cite its sources. Afterwards, double-check the answer against the documents to confirm every claim is supported. Also turn down the randomness setting, throw away weak search results instead of feeding them in, and raise a flag when no good material was found at all.

Re-ranking: why and how (cross-encoders, Cohere rerank).
Initial retrieval (bi-encoder/BM25) is fast but coarse—top-k often mis-ordered. Re-ranker re-scores those candidates for relevance. Cross-encoders feed query+doc together through one model for a precise score (accurate but slow, so applied only to top-k). Cohere/Voyage rerank APIs do this hosted. Pattern: retrieve 50–100 cheaply → re-rank → keep top 3–5 for the prompt.
Simple answer: The first, fast search grabs a rough list of maybe-relevant documents, but its ordering is often wrong. A re-ranker is a slower, smarter model that reads the question and each candidate document together and re-scores just that short list, putting the truly relevant ones on top. It's too slow to run on the whole database, which is why it only handles the shortlist. Typical recipe: cheaply fetch 50–100 candidates, re-rank them with a cross-encoder or a hosted API like Cohere's, and keep only the best 3–5 for the model to read.

Full fine-tuning vs LoRA/QLoRA vs prompt tuning; when to pick each.
Full FT: update all weights—max adaptation, expensive, risks forgetting, needs lots of data/compute. LoRA: train small low-rank adapter matrices, freeze base—cheap, fast, swappable, ~full quality for most tasks. QLoRA: LoRA on a 4-bit quantized base—fits big models on one GPU. Prompt/prefix tuning: learn soft prompt vectors only—tiny footprint, weaker. Default to LoRA/QLoRA; full FT only with strong reason and resources.
Simple answer: Full fine-tuning retrains the entire model — the most powerful option, but expensive, data-hungry, and it can make the model forget old skills. LoRA trains only a tiny add-on while the big model stays frozen — far cheaper and nearly as good for most tasks, and you can swap different add-ons for different jobs. QLoRA does the same trick on a compressed model, so even huge models fit on a single GPU. Prompt tuning learns just a few extra input vectors — the smallest footprint but also the weakest. Default to LoRA or QLoRA; only go full fine-tuning with a strong reason and real resources.

When do you fine-tune instead of using RAG or prompting?
Prompting first (cheapest). RAG when you need fresh/proprietary knowledge or citations. Fine-tune for behavior/format/style/domain-tone the model can't reliably follow via prompt, latency reduction (bake in behavior, shorter prompts), or specialized tasks/classification. Knowledge → RAG; behavior/format → fine-tune. Often combine: fine-tune for style + RAG for facts.
Simple answer: Always try plain prompting first — it's the cheapest and fastest option. If the model needs facts it doesn't have, like your company documents or fresh information, use RAG to feed those facts in at question time. Fine-tune only when the problem is behavior rather than facts: a style, format, or tone the model won't follow reliably no matter how you phrase the instructions, or when you want shorter prompts for speed. The memorable rule: new knowledge → RAG, new behavior → fine-tuning — and in practice you often combine the two.

Explain RLHF and DPO.
RLHF: train a reward model on human preference pairs, then optimize the LLM with RL (PPO) to maximize reward—aligns to human preference but complex and unstable. DPO: skips the separate reward model and RL loop—directly optimizes the policy on preference pairs via a classification-style loss. Simpler, stable, cheaper; now common. Both teach "prefer A over B" from human/AI feedback.
Simple answer: Both are ways to teach a model which answers people actually prefer. RLHF does it in two stages: first you train a separate "judge" model on examples where humans picked answer A over answer B, then you use reinforcement learning to push the LLM toward answers that judge scores highly — it works, but it's complicated and unstable to train. DPO cuts out the middle step: it trains the model directly on those same preference pairs with a simpler loss. That makes it easier, cheaper, and more stable, which is why it has become the common choice.

How do you build a training dataset and avoid catastrophic forgetting?
Dataset: define task, collect high-quality diverse examples, clean/dedupe, ensure correct format and label quality, hold out eval set; quality > quantity. Avoid forgetting: use LoRA (base frozen), mix in general/original-distribution data, low learning rate, fewer epochs, regularization, and eval on prior capabilities to catch regressions.
Simple answer: For the dataset: decide exactly what you want the model to do, collect clean and varied examples of it, remove duplicates and bad labels, and set some examples aside for testing — a small excellent dataset beats a big messy one. Catastrophic forgetting means the model loses old skills while learning new ones. To prevent it: use LoRA so the base model stays frozen, mix some general data into the training set, train gently with a low learning rate and few passes, and keep testing the old skills so you notice immediately if they slip.

Design an agentic workflow: planning, tool use, memory, reflection.
Planning: LLM decomposes goal into steps (upfront or iterative). Tool use: model calls functions/APIs/retrieval via structured calls; results feed back. Memory: short-term (scratchpad/context) + long-term (vector store/state). Reflection: critique its own output/errors and retry or replan. Loop until goal met or termination condition. Add a controller/state machine for routing and stop conditions.
Simple answer: An agent works in a repeating cycle. Planning: it breaks the big goal into smaller steps, either all at once up front or one step at a time. Tool use: it calls real functions and APIs — search, code, databases — and reads the results back. Memory: it keeps working notes for the current task, plus longer-term storage for things worth remembering across sessions. Reflection: it looks at its own results, spots mistakes, and retries or changes the plan. The loop runs until the job is done or a stop rule kicks in, with a controller deciding what happens next.

ReAct vs plan-and-execute patterns.
ReAct: interleaves reasoning + action step by step (think → act → observe → repeat)—adaptive, handles uncertainty, but more LLM calls and can loop. Plan-and-execute: plan all steps first, then execute—fewer reasoning calls, cheaper, more predictable, but rigid if reality deviates. Use ReAct for exploratory/dynamic tasks, plan-and-execute for well-defined multi-step pipelines; hybrids replan on failure.
Simple answer: ReAct thinks and acts one step at a time — think, do something, look at what happened, think again — which adapts well when the situation is unpredictable, but it burns more model calls and can wander in circles. Plan-and-execute writes the whole plan first and then just runs through it — cheaper and more predictable, but awkward when reality doesn't match the plan. Use ReAct for open-ended, exploratory tasks and plan-and-execute for well-understood routines; the practical hybrid is to plan up front and replan whenever a step fails.

How do you handle multi-agent orchestration (LangGraph, supervisor pattern)?
Model the system as a graph of agents/nodes with explicit state and edges (LangGraph). Supervisor pattern: a router agent delegates subtasks to specialist agents and aggregates results. Define state schema, handoff logic, termination. Alternatives: hierarchical teams, sequential pipelines, peer collaboration. Keep agents focused, control message passing, cap iterations to prevent runaway loops.
Simple answer: When one agent isn't enough, you arrange several of them like a flowchart with shared state that each one reads and updates — that's what LangGraph gives you. The most common setup is the supervisor pattern: one boss agent reads the task, hands sub-tasks to specialist agents, and combines their answers at the end. Other shapes exist too: chains where agents work in sequence, or teams of peers. Keep each agent focused on one job, be explicit about who passes what to whom, and always cap the number of rounds so they can't loop forever.

Error handling, retries, and loop/termination control in agents.
Wrap tool calls in try/except; retry with backoff on transient failures, validate tool outputs before use. Feed errors back to the model to self-correct. Termination: max steps/iterations, max cost/tokens, goal-satisfied check, no-progress detection. Guard against infinite loops (repeat-action detection) and cascading failures with fallbacks/human handoff.
Simple answer: Assume tools will fail sometimes. Catch every error, retry a few times with growing pauses for temporary problems like network hiccups, and check tool results before trusting them. A useful trick: show the error message to the model itself, and it will often fix its own mistake on the next try. Always set stop rules: a maximum number of steps, a spending or token cap, a check for "is the goal actually done," and detection for when the agent keeps repeating the same action — plus a fallback or human handoff when nothing works.

MCP and tool-calling design.
Tool calling: expose functions with clear schemas (name, description, typed params); model emits structured call, you execute and return result. MCP (Model Context Protocol): open standard to connect models to tools/data via servers, so tools are reusable across apps/clients instead of bespoke per integration. Design: small focused tools, precise descriptions, validate inputs, return concise structured results, handle errors gracefully.
Simple answer: Tool calling means describing your functions to the model — each with a name, a description, and typed inputs — so the model can ask to run one, you execute it, and you hand the result back for it to use. MCP is a standard plug for this — think of it like USB for AI tools — so a tool built once works with many different AI apps instead of needing custom wiring for each one. Good design rules: keep each tool small and single-purpose, describe it precisely, check the inputs, return short structured results, and fail gracefully.

How do you evaluate an LLM application without ground truth?
Reference-free LLM-as-judge on dimensions (relevance, faithfulness, coherence). RAG: faithfulness (answer grounded in context) + answer relevance + context relevance. Use rubrics/pairwise comparison, human spot-checks, user feedback signals (thumbs, edits), and guardrail/consistency checks. Build a curated eval set over time; track regressions per release.
Simple answer: When there's no answer key to compare against, use another LLM as a grader: it scores each output on qualities like relevance, faithfulness to the source material, and clarity, following a written rubric. For RAG, the key checks are: is the answer supported by the retrieved documents, does it address the question, and were the retrieved documents relevant. Add human spot-checks, watch real user signals like thumbs up/down and whether people edit the answers, and gradually save real cases into a test set so you can catch quality drops with every release.

LLM-as-a-judge: setup, biases, mitigation.
Setup: give judge model the input, output, and a clear rubric/scoring criteria; prefer pairwise or low-cardinality scales. Biases: position bias, verbosity bias, self-preference, leniency. Mitigate: randomize/swap order, use CoT reasoning before score, calibrate against human labels, ensembles, clear rubric with examples, stronger judge than the system under test.
Simple answer: The setup is simple: give a strong model the question, the answer to grade, and a clear scoring guide, and it grades the answer — either with a score or by picking the better of two options. But judges have known quirks: they favor whichever option is shown first, they prefer longer answers, they like their own writing style, and they tend to be too generous. The fixes: swap the order and grade twice, make the judge explain its reasoning before scoring, use simple scales with examples, compare its grades against human ones now and then, and use a judge that's stronger than the system being judged.

Offline vs online eval; what metrics for production.
Offline: pre-deploy on fixed datasets—accuracy, faithfulness, retrieval metrics, regression suites in CI. Online: live traffic—latency (p50/p95), cost/token, error rate, user feedback, thumbs/acceptance, A/B test outcomes, guardrail trigger rate, drift. Offline gates releases; online catches real-world failures and drift.
Simple answer: Offline evaluation happens before you ship: run the system on a fixed set of test questions and block the release if scores drop compared to the previous version. Online evaluation happens on live traffic after you ship: watch response times, cost per request, error rates, user thumbs up/down, how often safety checks fire, and A/B test results. You need both — offline testing stops bad versions from going out the door, while online monitoring catches the problems that only ever show up with real users and real data.

Detecting and measuring hallucination.
Faithfulness check: verify each claim is supported by retrieved context (LLM-judge or NLI entailment). Self-consistency: sample multiple outputs, flag disagreement. Groundedness scoring, citation verification, fact-checking against source. Metrics: faithfulness/groundedness score, % unsupported claims, contradiction rate. Track over time as a production eval.
Simple answer: To catch made-up content, check every claim in the answer against the source documents and flag anything that isn't supported — a grader model can do this automatically for each response. Another useful trick is self-consistency: ask the model the same question several times, and if the answers disagree with each other, it's probably guessing rather than knowing. Also verify that any citations really say what the answer claims. Turn these checks into numbers — like the percentage of unsupported claims — and track them over time so you notice when things get worse.

Design a chatbot/RAG system for X scale; latency, cost, caching.
Components: API gateway → retrieval (vector DB) → re-rank → LLM → guardrails → response, with tracing. Scale: replicate stateless services, async, queue heavy jobs. Latency: cache, smaller/faster models, streaming, parallel retrieval, p95 budget. Cost: model routing (cheap model for easy queries), prompt/semantic caching, batching, trim context. Add fallbacks, rate limits, monitoring.
Simple answer: The pipeline looks like this: a request comes in → search finds the relevant documents → the best ones are picked out → the model writes an answer → safety checks run → the response goes out, with every step logged. To handle scale, run many copies of each stateless piece and queue the heavy work. For speed: cache aggressively, use smaller models where possible, and stream words as they're generated. For cost: route easy questions to cheap models, reuse cached answers for repeat questions, and keep prompts trim. Add fallbacks, rate limits, and monitoring throughout.

Prompt caching, semantic caching, batching.
Prompt caching: reuse KV/compute for repeated prefixes (system prompt, few-shot)—cuts latency and cost on shared context. Semantic caching: return cached answer when a new query is embedding-similar to a past one—skip the LLM entirely for near-duplicates. Batching: group requests to maximize GPU throughput (offline/high-volume), trading latency for cost.
Simple answer: Prompt caching saves the computation done on the repeated beginning of your prompts — like the system instructions and examples that every request shares — so each new request is faster and cheaper. Semantic caching goes a step further: if someone asks basically the same question as a previous user, just return the saved answer and skip calling the model entirely. Batching groups many requests together so the hardware is used efficiently — ideal for bulk or overnight jobs where waiting a little longer per request is a fair trade for lower cost.

Guardrails: PII, prompt injection, jailbreaks, output validation.
Input: PII detection/redaction, prompt-injection and jailbreak classifiers, topic/scope filters. Output: schema/JSON validation, toxicity/safety checks, groundedness, format enforcement, retry on violation. Defense in depth: system-prompt hardening, separate untrusted data from instructions, allowlist tools, least privilege. Log and monitor trigger rates.
Simple answer: Guardrails are safety checks wrapped around the model. On the way in: strip out personal data, detect attempts to trick the model with hidden or malicious instructions, and block requests that are off-topic for your app. On the way out: check that the response has the right format, screen it for harmful content, and confirm it sticks to its sources — and retry if any check fails. Deeper defenses: keep untrusted text clearly separated from your instructions, only allow the tools you've approved, and give everything the minimum access it needs. Log how often each check fires.

Observability and tracing (Arize, LangSmith, Phoenix).
Trace every step (spans): retrieval, prompt, LLM call, tool calls, latency, tokens, cost. Run online evals on traces (faithfulness, relevance, hallucination). Monitor drift, errors, and quality over time; alert on regressions. Arize AX / Phoenix / LangSmith give the dashboards, eval pipelines, and trace inspection to debug and improve production agents.
Simple answer: Record everything each request does, step by step — the search results, the exact prompt sent, the model's reply, any tool calls, plus how long each step took and what it cost. With those records you can replay any bad answer and see exactly where it went wrong. Then run automatic quality checks on the recorded traffic — was the answer grounded, was it relevant, did it make things up — and set alerts for when quality slips. Tools like Arize, Phoenix, and LangSmith provide the dashboards and pipelines that make all this practical.

Cost optimization: model routing, distillation, quantization.
Routing: send easy queries to a small/cheap model, hard ones to a large model (classifier or cascade). Distillation: train a smaller model on a larger one's outputs to retain quality at lower cost. Quantization: lower weight precision (8/4-bit) to shrink memory and speed inference with minimal quality loss. Plus caching, prompt trimming, batching.
Simple answer: Three big levers. Routing: let a small cheap model handle the easy questions and save the expensive model for the genuinely hard ones — a simple classifier decides which is which. Distillation: teach a small model to imitate a big one by training it on the big model's answers, so you get near-big quality at small-model prices. Quantization: store the model's numbers with less precision so it uses less memory and runs faster, usually with barely any quality loss. On top of these, caching, shorter prompts, and batching all chip away at the bill.

Streaming, rate limits, fallback strategies.
Streaming: send tokens as generated for lower perceived latency. Rate limits: client-side throttling, queues, exponential backoff, token-bucket; respect provider limits. Fallbacks: retry → alternate model/provider → cached/default response → graceful degradation. Circuit breakers and timeouts to avoid cascading failure.
Simple answer: Streaming shows words to the user as they're written instead of making them stare at a blank screen until the whole answer is done — it feels dramatically faster. Rate limits protect you from hitting the provider too hard: queue your requests, slow down when you get errors, and wait progressively longer between retries. Fallbacks are your plan B when things break: retry first, then switch to another model or provider, then serve a cached or default response rather than nothing. Timeouts and circuit breakers stop one failure from dragging the whole system down.

Few-shot, CoT, self-consistency, structured output enforcement.
Few-shot: in-context examples to set format/behavior. CoT: prompt step-by-step reasoning for complex tasks. Self-consistency: sample multiple CoT paths, take majority answer—boosts accuracy at higher cost. Structured output: enforce schema via function calling, JSON mode, or constrained/grammar decoding so output is reliably parseable.
Simple answer: Few-shot means showing the model a couple of worked examples in the prompt so it copies the pattern instead of guessing what you want. Chain-of-thought means asking it to reason step by step before answering, which noticeably helps on harder problems. Self-consistency means asking the same question several times and going with the majority answer — more accurate, but it costs several times more. Structured output means forcing the reply into a fixed format like JSON, using the provider's built-in features, so your code can parse it reliably every single time.

How do you make outputs deterministic/JSON-reliable?
Temperature 0 (near-deterministic, not guaranteed). Use native JSON mode / function calling / structured output APIs or constrained decoding against a schema. Provide a clear schema + few-shot example. Validate with Pydantic; on failure, re-prompt with the error (retry loop). Avoid asking for prose around the JSON.
Simple answer: Set temperature to 0 so the model always picks its most likely choice — close to repeatable, though not perfectly guaranteed. Use the provider's built-in JSON mode or structured-output feature so the reply is forced to match your format instead of hoping it does. Show the exact fields you expect plus one filled-in example in the prompt. Then verify the output in code with something like Pydantic, and if it's invalid, send the error message back to the model and ask again in a short retry loop. Never ask for explanatory text around the JSON.

Walk me through a GenAI project you owned end to end.
Frame STAR: problem/business goal → your design (data, retrieval, model, agentic flow, evals) → tradeoffs and decisions → metrics/impact → challenges and how you solved them. Emphasize ownership, production concerns (latency, cost, guardrails, observability), and measurable outcome. Use a real project (e.g., a RAG/agentic reconciliation workflow with LangGraph + Arize evals).
Simple answer: Tell it as a story with a clear arc: what business problem you were solving and why it mattered, how you designed the solution (the data, the search setup, the model, the agent flow, the testing), which trade-offs you made and why you chose that way, what measurable results it delivered, and what went wrong along the way and how you fixed it. The impression to leave: you owned the whole thing end to end and cared about real-world concerns — speed, cost, safety, and monitoring — not just getting a demo working.

A time a model failed in production—how you debugged it.
Structure: symptom (bad/hallucinated output, latency spike) → how detected (traces, eval drop, user report) → root-cause via tracing (retrieval miss? prompt? model change? bad data?) → fix (chunking, re-rank, prompt, guardrail) → verification (eval + monitoring) → prevention (regression test, alert). Shows systematic, data-driven debugging.
Simple answer: Tell it like a detective story: what broke and how you noticed it (an alert, falling quality scores, a user complaint), how you traced the failing request step by step to find the true cause — was the search returning the wrong documents, did a prompt change break something, did the model or the data change — then what you changed to fix it, how you proved the fix actually worked, and finally what you put in place so the same problem can never sneak back in unnoticed. The point is showing calm, systematic, evidence-driven debugging.

How you keep up with a fast-moving field.
Papers (arXiv, key labs), newsletters, model release notes, practitioner blogs, and hands-on experimentation. Build small prototypes with new techniques, follow eval/benchmarks critically, and engage with community (X, GitHub, Discord). Emphasize filtering hype and validating what actually works in production.
Simple answer: Mix reading with doing. Follow new papers, model release notes, newsletters, and blogs from people actually building things — but don't stop at reading: build small test projects to try new techniques with your own hands, because that's how you learn what really works. Look at benchmark claims with healthy skepticism, and stay active in developer communities where practical lessons surface first. The key point to convey: you filter out the hype and only trust what proves itself in a real production setting.

Implement a basic RAG retriever / cosine similarity from scratch.
```python
import numpy as np

def cosine_sim(a, b):
    return np.dot(a, b) / (np.linalg.norm(a) * np.linalg.norm(b))

def retrieve(query_emb, doc_embs, docs, k=3):
    scores = [cosine_sim(query_emb, d) for d in doc_embs]
    top = np.argsort(scores)[::-1][:k]
    return [(docs[i], scores[i]) for i in top]
```
Simple answer: Cosine similarity measures how closely two vectors point in the same direction — a score near 1 means very similar meaning, near 0 means unrelated. The retriever simply scores the query vector against every stored document vector, sorts the scores from highest to lowest, and returns the top k documents with their scores.

Parse and validate LLM JSON output with retries.
```python
import json
from pydantic import BaseModel, ValidationError

class Out(BaseModel):
    name: str
    score: float

def parse(call_llm, prompt, retries=3):
    for _ in range(retries):
        raw = call_llm(prompt)
        try:
            return Out(**json.loads(raw))
        except (json.JSONDecodeError, ValidationError) as e:
            prompt = f"{prompt}\n\nInvalid output: {raw}\nError: {e}\nReturn valid JSON only."
    raise ValueError("Failed after retries")
```
Simple answer: Call the model, try to read its reply as JSON, and check that it has exactly the expected fields and types. If that fails, don't give up — append the bad output and the error message to the prompt and ask the model again, so it can see what it did wrong. Repeat up to a few times, and only raise an error if every attempt fails.

Implement a token-aware text chunker.
```python
def chunk(text, tokenizer, max_tokens=500, overlap=50):
    toks = tokenizer.encode(text)
    chunks, start = [], 0
    while start < len(toks):
        end = start + max_tokens
        chunks.append(tokenizer.decode(toks[start:end]))
        start += max_tokens - overlap
    return chunks
```
Simple answer: Convert the text into tokens first, so the pieces are measured the same way the model measures them. Then slice the token list into pieces of at most max_tokens, but step forward slightly less than a full piece each time — that way neighboring chunks overlap a little, and no idea gets lost right at a cut point. Decode each slice back into text and return the list of chunks.
